Asylum

He knocks and the white woman answers and he finally remembers Carrie – tall, fluttery, a year ahead of him in accounting school at a satellite campus of the state university. She welcomes Dennis, shows him to his room: green iron bed frame, thin mattress, wooden cross, bars on the windows, walls painted the yellow of a smoker's teeth.

"I know it's weird," Carrie says. "I inherited from my grandmother. She was, uh, eccentric. She wanted to live in an asylum, but nobody would take her. They said she wasn't crazy, or not that kind of crazy. So she built this place."

"What is that sound?"
"The highway over the canyon. The house kind of vibrates most of the day. You get used to it."
"It sounds like human voices. Like hundreds of them."
"That's the echo. You get used to that, too, sort of. It's disorienting, but those are just my friends in the kitchen. Come on."

Trailing his new employer, Dennis is almost nauseated by the network of parallel and diagonal hallways. The corners of the house, which should be triangular, are convex polyhedrons that trap, distort and amplify their steps, filling the halls with invisible others, all shuffling toward the kitchen. These multifaceted corners have mirrors embedded in the plaster, long reflective strips on the windowsills and baseboards, with tiny circular mirrors in the roof beams and tile floor that let Dennis see around corners, in full circles, up multiple corridors simultaneously, into nested reflections where he and Carrie fold into and out of one another. It feels like being racked on the spokes of a kaleidoscope.

The kitchen isn't full of people, but mirrors built into the countertops and cupboards square and cube the women, and their echo sounds like a concert hall full of teenagers, though it's just six people conversing in normal tones. Carrie hands him a glass of kahlua and cream. He doesn't see or smell food, though Thao assured him room and board are part of the deal.

Dennis makes polite conversation, Carrie's friends cordial, but not giddy like he's seen them get around taller, better-looking Black men. Dennis is short, plain, quietly spoken and careful never to mention his oddball fancies, like that several of his reflections are right now conspiring to sneak out behind his back, or that these reflections all fall into line when the caterer arrives: beef bourguignon, fondant potatoes, ratatouille and plum galette. Since he lost his company and house in the last recession, Dennis has been on bananas and beans, rice and ramen.

After the party breaks up Carrie goes to bed, leaving Dennis to unpack. He'd been scared of sleeping in old lady funk, but the bare room smells like pipe smoke and dust. The traffic overhead keeps him awake. He hadn't noticed it beneath the party chatter, but in the sleeping house he hears the interstate in the walls like wheezing lungs.

The strip mirrors in the corners are a reel of exposed negatives showing a man not getting any sleep. Maybe he's just nervous, first day on the job, a new boss revived from the hazy memory of someone who used to be an equal, but inherited a house around the time Dennis lost his. He's grateful to Carrie for having kept her distance tonight, saving them both the difficulty of pretending they ever really knew each other, or that their common past implies anything about Dennis' current set-up. He wonders what he'll be working on. The few things Carrie mentioned – mounting the TV, moving furniture to the attic, hanging paintings – won't take him the full month. Dennis hopes he didn't oversell his carpentry skills by implying he had any. She expects something from him, and the whir in the walls seems to want to tell him what, but the pitch is too low, its vibration too constant to mean much.

~

In the morning Dennis sits at the kitchen counter in what he considers handyman clothes, jeans and a t-shirt, the best he could do considering he owns nothing flannel. He doesn't hear Carrie stirring. In the fridge he finds low-fat yogurt, skim milk, Dijon mustard and celery. He searches the cupboards, cabinets, pantry, then settles for celery and yogurt. There's coffee, at least, and though he's never used a percolator he gets the idea. To kill time, he warms the milk. The echoes are less oppressive in the morning. Sun-glazed mirrors wink discreetly at private jokes.

Around nine, Carrie appears in iterations from three halls at once. High-heels-on-tile ricochet floor to ceiling, chopping her words to syncopated hash.

"Sorry, what?"
"You made coffee," she repeats. The echoes make her tone hard to parse. Has he overstepped? "No," she says, "it's great. Could you bring me a cup in my office?"

It takes Dennis several tries to find her office among the bedrooms, all with the same sheets, same cross. Mirrors fool him twice into pulling up short at long hallways that turn out to be walls. There are single stairs at random intervals, their depth obscured in the gingham pattern of the tiles. He sloshes coffee everywhere.

Last night, before he fell asleep, it occurred to him that Carrie's grandmother was trying to drive herself nuts, but in a reasoned, methodical way. He hopes she appreciated the irony, though the house shows no sign of ironical intent. The institutional lighting suggests deadpan lunacy, a house ideal for spying and eavesdropping, an edifice of missteps and disproportion that gets its kicks from nudging his breathing into obscenity, his squeaky heels into infantile insolence, a discreet burp into vulgar innocence.

He finds Carrie in an outbuilding at an elaborate wooden desk, facing a wall empty except for a smattering of circular mirrors, each containing a miniature view of the woods through the window at her back, and fragments of the overpass fractured in the treetops like wreckage. He sets the coffee on a coaster beside her and she seems not to notice, purring like the walls as she studies spreadsheets on a tablet in her lap.

When he tries to peek she turns it away, then taps at it until a printer in the corner chugs to life. She hands Dennis a single sheet. Agenda, it says, with today's date. It looks like a high school schedule, ninety minute blocks, two ten-minute breaks, forty-five minutes for lunch. His tasks for the morning are cleaning the gutters, reshingling the roof and washing the skylights. Dennis is pretty sure he can't reshingle the roof in ninety minutes. It'll take at least that long to figure out how.

"Just do your best," Carrie says. She'd help, but she's got to monitor her investments. She'll also have to spend a few hours preparing his contract and full agenda. There's an administrative burden that comes with being a job creator, as Dennis knows. She hopes he appreciates it.

"I do. Really, I do. But I thought maybe I should go food shopping?"

She takes the agenda from his hand, crosses out roof shingling, inserts shopping. He'll also need to buy shingles and other materials, she supposes. Carrie reaches into her purse, then pauses. It might look sketchy. What might look sketchy? Nothing, nevermind. She hands him a rubber-banded roll of hundreds and the car keys. He can take her grandmother's station wagon.

Dennis waits until he's in the car to separate the bills into his wallet and pockets.

When he comes back with food, materials and ten bucks change, Carrie hands him a blue canvas binder. Inside are thirty daily agendas. Because he's so far behind on his tasks for today she's reassigned them for tomorrow. He'll have to start trying a bit harder, okay? Superb. She's having a superb day. Her investments are really taking off. She'd be happy to give him some investment pointers, but today she's got a luncheon. She ordered Dennis a sandwich. It's on the counter. He should take the rest of the day off to get ready to really give his best tomorrow.

Dennis eats on the back porch, watching instructional videos on roofing, but trucks rattle the joints in the bridge above, steel ribs warbling, the inevitable asshole's horn reverberating in the gully. He can't hear a thing, so he switches to the new agendas to see what other manly arts he'll have to fake.

The first job each morning, nine to nine-fifteen, is serving coffee. Some yardwork, cleaning the bathrooms and kitchen, sweeping and mopping, washing the car. Okay, so he's like a maid, or a caretaker. Dennis doesn't mind taking care. Somebody should.

When he brings Carrie's coffee the next morning she's got green skin, purple eye sockets, face propped on a fist. She glares at the coffee. Did he read the agenda? Did he understand everything? Sure did. Carrie sniffs the coffee, but doesn't drink, turning to her screen. Her investments are doing better than her kidneys. She's too hungover to walk him through everything now, but Dennis should start on the roof. There's a leak in her bedroom. Also, yesterday he heated the milk. His father kept talking, moving his hands.

As they talked (and talked, and talked) Buck searched for hints, clues. Would Tim leave? He seemed too tired. Would they fight? Dad looked happy. Buck dangled from the closest chair, knees on the seat with his arms hanging over, rails between himself and them, watching the sink under the window. The curtains were pulled and the sun almost gone, but a few rays filtered into a gleam wrapped unbroken around the chrome basin. When the dusk rose and the gleam settled Buck climbed up a stool, near but not too near Tim, who sat sipping coffee like he couldn't see, until he reached through all that empty space and cupped his hand around the nape of Buck's neck and pulled him close, where he stayed until dinner.

~

Once, twice a month, father said, I stir the herd. Churn the turf, let the water in, let the manure in. Break the soil, you expose new seeds. Seeds been buried since God knows when, before my grandfather. Break the earth and life fills in the cracks. You'll remember that for when I'm gone.

Tim strained to listen. Dropseed, gamma grass, texoka. If he could remember their names, and the portents in the clouds, could he remember himself? Right now he was a thousand miles above the ground, staring down on a motherless land. To the east the sun broke free of the dirt. In the north, smoke. Tim lifted his trigger finger, aimed it at the sky.

~

The next morning their father had them stir the herd. Tim took the Appaloosa, so Buck rode Mary, their Welsh pony. Trotting over grass brittle as a field of matchsticks, Buck hung back. The herd was in the north. The smoke smell made them skittish, though they mostly ignored Tim, waving his hat and hollering. Sometimes they gathered around him, when Buck and Mary charged into their blind spots, scattering them like dandelion puffs. After half an hour Tim was sweating and breathing hard, and Buck was bored.

"Guess I'm rusty," Tim said.
"Me too," he lied. He said maybe they should spook the yearlings, so the heifers would circle up, and they could drive them all together. Buck stole a look. Tim was grinning.
"You're pretty good on it," he said. "Bet you could run this place."
"Reckon not."
"When you're older."
"When I get old I'm joining the Army." He glanced again. Tim looked like dad. You couldn't tell anything from his face. Buck wondered if maybe he had to kill somebody. But Tim smiled again.
"Know what I saw over there?" he said. "Snow. It was up the mountains, mountains so huge you wouldn't believe. You're down in the desert sweating like a hog and the whole time they're right there, ice cold." Buck saw snow once, too, on TV. On TV the kids ran around with their tongues out catching snowflakes. "What do you think about living somewhere like that? Someplace with mountains and snow."
"Nah."
"What about going to college, doing something easy, like being a banker, or if you could go somewhere exciting, like the beach or some city somewhere?"
"Nah."
"Gimme one reason."

He had a lot of reasons. School, his friends, his horse, which Tim was only borrowing just for now. But the reason that mattered was the sunlight through the kitchen window, and the dust in the barn. He needed to stay by the light.

"Just don't wanna."
"So you're happy here?"

Sure, Buck said, because it was the right answer. What else could he say? Of course he wasn't happy. He would never be happy until she came back. The only thing now was to keep Tim home. Keep him there, close, and dad, so the three of them could stop anything else from happening.

"I don't wanna leave," he said. He spit in the dirt to make it official.

~

Carl stood on the porch at sunset, sneaking a chaw. Eileen'd made him give it up the year Bucky was born. Tim was twelve then, and she'd caught him skulking in the barn with a wad of mud tucked in his bottom lip. She'd thrown the gob smack in Carl's chest, told him to eat it his own damn self, and since then he'd kept a tin in a plastic baggie in the stable rafters. He only took it down when he needed to think, and he was trying hard now, but his mind kept getting caught on the breeze, still safely from the south, bending the double line of prairie fire sumac along the drive. Carl planted those trees with his father going on fifty years ago. Pop was ten years in his grave, but the trees still looked good.

While the boys were in the pasture Carl had taken the tractor and plowed a firebreak twenty-five feet wide and a mile long. Pitiful. Time was, all the neighbors would get out and dig. Now the companies just let it burn. Good for the soil, they say. Make it up next year.

Fire stained the northern sky hellish yellow, like an old bruise. "Big dogs want the land." That's what Lee Morgan told him. "They gonna get it. Next year, five years, ten. They live forever, Carl. Don't get old, don't get sick. Now's your chance, right now, to walk with some real money." Lee's smile never wavered. Carl had imagined him in air-conditioning, shiny shoes on a shiny desk, waiting for a living. He spat over the porch rail. One-hundred and forty-four prairie fire sumac all bent north, toward the light.

The boys had decided to stay. Tim, who'd been half-crazed to get out, wanted to stay. Neither of them could say why, but that was alright. Like the decision grew from the ground. It meant another ten, fifteen years of the same drudgery, the same fears. If he was lucky. It meant sleeping in that half-empty bed. Dying in that bed, hopefully. That was alright, too. It's where she died. It meant the boys would have a home. Buck would come up from the same soil as the rest of them.

The fire was close, but the insurance was paid up. Better to let the place burn than roll over for the likes of Lee Morgan. The breeze was still out of the south. Carl would be up all night, drinking black coffee, watching the trees. The trees would give him a half-hour's warning. By morning things could be clearer. If not certain, at least more certain.

"What's that?" Buck asked. The boy could creep up on you. Both of them were lurking in the door. Carl ducked his head, tossed the chaw into the pachysandra. "Dad? What is that?" He pointed at the glow.

"Nothing to worry about," Tim told him. "Come inside, let's get dinner started." The prairie fire sumacs rustled, turning their heads toward the house. Buck coughed. Fat gray flakes sprinkled the lawn, hanging suspended in the electric light like ornaments against the dark. Buck whooped and leapt from the stairs, and though he knew it was too hot for snow, he ran in the yard, mouth agape, straining to catch the ashes on his tongue.