Island

Yasmin and Alex have booked the platinum villa for the five-day, four-night honeymoon package, a seaside cottage in a fruit grove at the end of a peninsula surrounded by reefs, ideal for snorkeling and fencing out the man-eating sharks in the deep water. The driver slides back the van door and the humid night crashes in. Yasmin reels, gropes for words to describe the smell, a greenish-brown basenote, vanilla musk, heart of rain. The dangling flowers are angel's trumpets, the sickly alkaloid smell of nightshade, a neurotoxic bloom resplendent in white light. Magnolias line the walkway, fragrant moons like poems perched in trees. She'll fill her bags and bring them home.

Alex narrates the villa, filming the approach on his phone: hexagonal bamboo frame, thirty-foot ceiling, thatch roof overhanging the Jacuzzi on the sea side of a wrap-around teak deck, tile steps descending the cliff to the beach, and inside, two-hundred and seventy degrees of bay windows, sunken master bedroom, the window partially submerged with a view of coral and psychedelic fish. He declares it a perfect example of luxury living expressed through indigenous materials and techniques, though he's probably quoting the website, and no one will ever see the video except his mom.

The driver explains the voice-controlled lights and espresso machine, vacuum juicer and home theater controls, hanging around Alex waiting for a tip. Yasmin gives him twenty dollars and says goodnight. He looks at her green money, white husband, and chuckles. She doesn't care. They're married and nobody can do shit about it.

“We won,” Yasmin says when he's gone. Great, Alex says. What do we win? “Babies.” Alex laughs, but Yasmin isn't joking. She left her pills at home. They're both young, got plenty of time, but Alex has family money and wants four kids, Yasmin wants five, so why wait? She runs the shower, a chamber of nozzles like something from a CDC lab. The bed's big, so's the jacuzzi, the beach is private, and elderly people must come here, because the shower has grab bars and a slip-proof floor. It won't be hard to get pregnant here.

Hunger intrudes the next day. Alex boils four lobsters, leaving the rest, while Yasmin plates nori salad with pickled asparagus and opens the first bottle of champagne. They dine al fresco, watching a storm come in. Yasmin wishes she could write a poem like a rolling violet cloud a thousand feet high, crackling static bolts frenzying the sea. When the rain picks up, they leave the empty bottle and lobster husks, running for shelter with the tiramisu and chardonnay.

A lounge chair, sick of its job, blasts off the deck and vanishes into the black afternoon. They make up stories about where it might have gone, what urgent business could have called it off so suddenly, laughing and happy, until the raindrops turn fat and mad and thunder pounds at the windows. The storm wants to come in. The house sways, walls rocking in a failed effort to comfort them. Alex examines the roof, which is only thatch on the outside. The inside's made of iron beams. They'll be fine, he says, then leaps at an explosion so near it rattles the silverware in its drawer. The lights go out. “It's okay,” Alex screams over the wind.

Yasmin hasn't been this scared since she was a kid. It's like the storm's inside her. She presses her hands and face to the glass. The violence feels like a revelation. Alex has to pull her away from the window. They might burst. She crouches with him behind the stainless steel oven. The pillars in the kitchen bend inland, suggesting evacuation. Alex says they should find candles or a flashlight, but neither of them moves.

When the storm weakens, Yasmin's legs are too cramped to walk. The windows are gray. It's nearly dawn and by the time she finds the flashlight they don't need it. The sun has risen in a blameless sky. There are dead fish all over the deck. Alex and Yasmin go to bed, still freshly made from the housekeeper's visit yesterday.

They wake near sunset. Alex creeps outside like the storm might be hiding around a corner. Yasmin cleans branches and thatch from the grove while Alex sweeps up the fish, which he loads into a bucket and dumps over the cliff. Peering down, he calls to Yasmin. There's a tide pool with an octopus in it. Ordinarily Yasmin would find that inspiring, but she feels like she's been dancing all night. Weak, supposedly happy to be alive, really just dazed by the sudden stability of her surroundings. She gathers fruit from the lawn – a pile of mangoes, guava, bananas, plantains, avocados, oranges, lemons, passion fruit, a fuzzy purple fruit with green spikes. “What would a haul like this cost at home?” Alex cocks his head.

“Two hundred bucks,” he says. “Eighty for the fresh octopus.”

They gorge on mango to stay out of the fridge until the power comes back, but that resolution lasts half an hour. They eat the rest of the lobster with shiitake risotto and prosecco rosé by flashlight. “To survival,” Alex toasts. Yasmin can't tell how ironical he means to be. Their house only looks like a bamboo hut, she reminds him. People in real bamboo huts might not have survived. She can't imagine how they would've. Alex cracks a claw and sucks contemplatively. Maybe they should push back their flights, stay and help clean up? Yasmin thinks they'll be lucky if the airport's even open.

The next day she wants to take a morning walk. Alex would rather finish picking up thatch to repair the fake roof. Yasmin invites him twice. It's the last full day of their honeymoon and the multinational that owns this place will pay a local to fix the roof. Alex is stealing somebody's job. He shrugs. He felt so helpless during the storm. It gave him perspective. He wants to help. Besides, somebody should stay here in case the resort staff comes.

She goes alone. The road is buried in branches, sand and leaves, a total mess, but not enough to explain why the staff hasn't driven out to switch the power on. She hopes no one got hurt at the main resort. She figures she'll walk to the next villa down the road, see what they've heard. There was a sign, Gold Villa, a five-minute drive from their place.

Alex is missing a beautiful walk, walled in verdure with turquoise highlights, bougainvillea eruptions in fuchsia and cerise, butterflies she could never have imagined. One is transparent, floating like a jellyfish, turning the air between them to water. One has a long black tail, like a cat, that undulates in flight. Another looks like a dead leaf fluttering in search of its lost tree. She follows them down the road to the beach, but she must have gotten distracted. This road doesn't go to the beach. It runs along the peninsula to the resort.

Searching for the road, she finds it under her feet. A few feet further and it drops off a ledge and continues underwater, descending into silty mist. Across the water, it rises on a hill and disappears into the jungle. On the opposite shore, one corner of the Gold Villa's foundation is pointing skyward, the rest stuck like a shoe in the mudslide, waves lapping at the roof. There's a breeze in the dune grass, bees in the hibiscus, a tranquil scene of devastation.

Yasmin stares at the strait, processing the many differences between peninsula and island, until she feels weak from the sun. She should tell Alex. She finds him cleaning the gutters shirtless, wearing muck like elbow-length opera gloves, grinning. He'll be done in a minute, then let's go for a swim?

She tells him about the sunken causeway, the upended house, unsubtle hints that they're nobody's top priority. Alex climbs down and washes up. “Somebody will send a boat,” he says. “If not the resort then the police or military, the Red Cross. Eventually.” She reminds him about the reefs. “So they'll send a helicopter with a dangling rescue guy.”

Yasmin thinks the danglers will be busy rescuing people in real danger. Here, they've got an obscene amount of food, a thousand liters of fresh water on the roof, a gas stove, a two-hundred dollar fruit pile. The home theater's useless, but she packed books. “Let's call it an extended honeymoon,” she says. “If nobody comes before the food runs out, we'll swim the strait and hike to the resort.”

~

On the next day's morning walk, she sees a hummingbird with a forked tail, feathers twisting sunlight from teal to black, tongue like an anteater. In the canopy are orchids, bright red tentacles spotted with white flowers like alien invaders in poor disguises, their freakish stench identifiable from a distance. A pack of monkeys trails her, gossiping about her hairlessness. Later, they drop fruit peels on her head to satisfy their bored malice, so human she could cry.

At the new beach, Yasmin wades into the water to wash. It was Alex's idea to ration their drinking water by not showering. Her shoulders are spotted from fruit peels and butterfly shit, translucent from sweat. She plunges, scrubs her clothes and skin with sand, then lays them apart on the beach to dry.

A cloud crosses the sun and she sits up to stare over the water. She told Alex it was a mile across, but it's not that far. Half a mile? There's nothing for scale but the Gold Villa, which has almost finished sinking, totally upside-down now. The water is shallow and flat. Yasmin decides to make a trial swim, halfway out and back. Their flight isn't until this evening. They could still make it.

She swims hard, but when she lifts her head to check her progress, she sees nothing but ocean and sky. She's gotten turned around. Something bites her foot. No, she kicked the reef, five feet down. There's the island, behind her and receding. Her feet trail into cold water. She's getting sucked out to sea. No reason to panic. Except for the sharks. Slowly, slowly she swims out of the current, into the lee of her island. She doesn't see sharks, but that's one of the problems with them. Is she at least out of the riptide? It's hard to tell, she's so focused on not crying.

The shadow under her isn't her shadow. It's just a bit shorter than her, and a much better swimmer. A second shadow passes, or it's the same shark circling. She can see the reef, a long white ripple ahead of her. She doesn't have to get to shore, just the reef. If the sharks let her get that far, they'll let her go. They're deciding now. Will they nibble? Small fish gather, hoping for scraps. A fin breaks the surface. Something brushes her foot, and suppressing a scream turns Yasmin's vision red. Slowly she swims, quietly she cries, blind. She hopes she tastes horrible. That's what they say, right? An animal that died in terror tastes bad.

The sharks turn back before the reef, and she floats over it, limp as sea trash. In the lagoon it's shallow enough to walk, though it takes her two tries. She's in her underwear. It was only luck she floated over the reef at high tide. If a wave had dropped her into the coral she would've been slashed bloody, served to sharks in her own sauce. Walking back to the villa, Yasmin decides that when her friends ask, she'll tell them it was a non-traditional honeymoon and leave it at that.

Alex is sitting on the deck clutching his hand in a towel. “It's not that bad,” he says, but won't show her. He needs to keep pressure on until the bleeding stops. “Where are your clothes?” She forgets, she doesn't know. There's a first aid kit in the bathroom. She needs to disinfect and bandage his hand. Wounds fester in the tropics, all the books say so. Alex needs stitches and a tetanus shot. He gets rubbing alcohol and gauze.

“I'm opening champagne,” she says.
“Pint glass for me, please.”

They sit in the shade on the lounge chair that stuck around, and Yasmin tells him about the current and the sharks. Alex's response, “Oh, fuck,” might be the title of her next poem. Alex hopes the dangling rescue guy comes soon.

The fish in the fridge are starting to smell, so they roast everything in the gas oven – tuna, salmon and snapper, shrimp, mussels, clams – pile it all on a plate with fried plantains and sit at the dining room table. “It looks so strange,” Alex says. When Yasmin asks what's strange, he can't explain the pile of seafood, the rosewood table with silver candelabra and place settings for eight, in the context of a typhoon, sharks and a machete wound.

After dinner he mixes martinis and they drink in bed in the dark. Alex imagines tropical bacteria in the sheets, in the air. Yasmin watches the water slosh against their bedroom window picturing the lagoon rising, glass cracking, their bedroom filling with sharks. When he asks what she's thinking, she says nothing. He says the same. So, sex?

“Absolutely not.”

Alex laughs. It doesn't matter if she gets pregnant. They're not going to be stranded for nine months. They'll probably be home sometime next week. Yasmin stuffs the space between them with pillows. She just tried to swim the channel not pregnant and didn't come close. She's not going to try it puking. Right now, they need to focus on surviving their honeymoon.

~

Alex commandeers the soap, her shampoo, the laundry detergent. He's very sorry, but he needs it for his hand. Yasmin endures a week of salt. Three times daily she walks to the spring to wash the crunch from her eyelashes and the cracks in her lips, and also to get away from Alex. His achy hand and idleness are making him cranky. He was building an aqueduct when he cut himself, planning to run the spring down a bamboo chute through the kitchen window. He wants her to finish it. He's been talking about clearing a helipad for so long Yasmin suspects he's feverish, but he's not flushed and the cut doesn't look infected. He's going nuts on his own.

The gas runs out. Alex stares at the gauge, stuck at half-full. She knocks on the tank, which sounds like a gong. “I'd better get some firewood,” she says. “You should make martinis.” Yasmin drags branches into a pile near the house. Alex drinks his drink while she searches for paper and matches. She hasn't made a fire since Girl Scouts. While she tries, Alex corrects her technique.

Yasmin, so far, has not said anything about his increasingly shitty attitude. She's more worried about their water supply. Yesterday she climbed onto the roof to look for fruit and saw the tank nearly empty. It hasn't rained since the storm. The fruit trees aren't fruiting, and their two-hundred dollar produce pile has turned into fly-blackened mush. The fridge food is gone. What's left in the freezer is nearly spoiled, Alex is out of rubbing alcohol and down to his last bar of soap, and his bandage is still blood-spotted in the mornings.

While she curses the fire, Alex finishes his martini and starts on hers. “We're out of vermouth,” he says. “Alert the navy. Also, those branches are too big. You need to start with twigs, then sticks, then branches.”

Annoyingly, this works, and she leaves the fire burning to round up their last real dinner. Bendy carrots, wrinkled tomatoes and a mango. The yellowfin from the freezer looks fine, but smells evil. Yasmin throws it on the beach for the crabs, which she traps under a laundry basket. They're small crabs with stringy meat, but she caught two dozen.

Alex isn't satisfied. “We've got a whole cabinet of spices. You didn't have to boil them in plain seawater.” Yasmin politely asks him to start helping or stop fucking complaining, then wonders aloud if he never learned to say please and thank you because he grew up with servants. Alex doesn't like the subtext. Does he treat her like a servant? He gestures to the villa like he built it. Look where he brought her. You don't bring a servant here. You bring your wife, if you love her. Otherwise, you bring your mistress.

“I caught and cooked you a crab dinner. Be happy.”
“I can catch crabs. It's not that hard. What? Stop laughing at me.”

Alex sulks, poking the fire. Yasmin, who has plenty more to say, restrains herself. She goes to the beach to pick another bucket of crabs from the fish carcasses. When she returns, Alex gives back her shampoo. He's sorry. It was wrong of him to take it.

~

The villa shows no signs of desperation. The monkeys seem to be enjoying the long run of fine weather. Hundreds of insect species flourish here, but Yasmin and Alex do not. Alex's hand looks and smells like old ground beef and Yasmin's vomiting every morning. She'd hoped she missed her period from stress, but no. “That means I can't eat fish.” Alex says there's no mercury in these fish. These fish are uncorrupted by industrialization. Yasmin lists the things she can eat – leaves, flowers, monkeys – and Alex starts calling her Patient Zero.

She watches the monkeys and tries to eat the same waxy leaves they're eating, but they come out whole in her poop. Alex grills octopus, fries fish, boils crabs with curry paste while Yasmin eats boiled bamboo splinters. When he sees she won't be tempted by his seafood buffets, he accuses her of trying to starve the baby. She ignores him. Beneath a rock she's found a breakfast centipede thick as her thumb, but reaching, her hand vanishes into a black hole, then the world with it.

Consciousness returns as a partial eclipse and weight on her chest, blood in her mouth, flesh in her throat. The dark form is Alex, straddling her, shoving raw fish into her mouth. Yasmin slaps him until he's off, then spits the fish in his face. When she can see, she sees he's terrified. He thought she was dead.

“Is that what you think CPR is?” Alex looks like he's going to cry. “Fine, I'll eat the damn fish,” she says. “But cook me something. No more Guantanamo sashimi.”

Alex runs to screen fish from the tide pool, traps crabs, digs clams, scrapes barnacles and dives for urchins, grills them all on last night's embers. They've been eating by the fire lately, but this morning he sets the dining room table. Linen tablecloth and napkins in silver rings, crystal vase, a mystification of blooms – the only sour note is her own reflection. Yasmin fingercombs the twigs and leaves from her hair.

The seafood board Alex sets on the table could feature in the villa's brochure, the trendiest of trendy diets. To Yasmin it smells like Alex's wound. Putrid. Once she starts to eat, though, her nausea dissipates. She shells a dozen crabs, bites off their eyes, chews the bones of the little silver fish. She eats barnacles, which she's seen on posh menus and instinctively avoided. Turns out they're delicious, like eating the ocean. Urchins are good, too. Yasmin feels a tingling in her skin, her veins and fingertips throbbing. Her vision clears and sound rushes back, the estranged world coming closer.

After breakfast they lie on the sofa watching the dead TV. “Our island nation is in decline,” Yasmin says to his reflection. “We must become a seafaring people.”

“Like build a boat?”

She's been thinking about it all week. If they could seal up the rain barrels they'd be like pontoons. Bamboo gondolier poles, they lash doors to the barrels with sheets and vines, pole their way across the strait.

“Sheets and vines won't work,” Alex says. “But the electrical cable to the mainland would. We could strip off the rubber and use the wire.”
“If we cut the cable,” Yasmin says, “it will fall into the water. We could pull ourselves across.”
“With no boat? What about the sharks?”
“We could go in the rain barrels. No, you're too big for a rain barrel. The water tank on the roof is a thousand liters. That's big enough. If we can get it off the roof without cracking it, and get inside without sinking it.”

Yasmin climbs onto the roof and cuts the power cable with the machete. It falls into the trees thirty feet above the ground. That can be a problem for later. Alex shoves the water tank one-handed while she guides it down to the roof, then Alex jumps to the ground and sets up the bamboo skids. Yasmin slides the tank to the ground and they roll it down the street to the beach, where the cable dips from a palm into the water. Pulling together, they coil slack into the tank, which they position at the edge of the road. They can climb inside and roll into the water.

“It's still early,” Alex says. “If we go now, we could make the resort before dark.” Yasmin thinks maybe they should pack: house keys, credit cards, passports. Alex laughs. “I forgot about the world. Seems a bit silly, passports and keys, credit cards.” On the walk back to the villa he admires orchids, hummingbirds, a pack of monkeys while Yasmin imagines his bad hand slipping on the cable, the current dragging them to sea in a plastic tub, capsizing, being eaten alive by sharks, first Alex, then her.

They fill a backpack with the essentials, leaving their suitcases stuffed with clothes. Alex locks the front door and slips the key under. They stop to look back at the house. “It's so beautiful,” Yasmin says. “Promise me we'll never come back.” He promises.

At the end of the road, Alex counts three and they dive into the rolling tank, tumbling as they fall off the road into the water, sinking then surging up again, the sky confined to a bobbing circle, drifting seawards. They keep a good grip, though, and the cable tightens, the tub steadies and working three-handed, they skitter over the channel and step onto land with their feet still dry.

Yasmin screams a flock of egrets from the palms when Alex lifts and spins her. “I feel like we won some fucked-up game show,” she says. They start down the road holding each other up, but neither can walk laughing this hard. They lie on the pavement cackling until a snake passes, then more snake, and more. It's like waiting at a railroad crossing. When the snake disappears into the bushes, they jog off, giggling in terror.

“Nobody's ever going to believe us,” Yasmin says. “Parts, maybe, but the snake? That's obviously an exaggeration.” Alex thinks she'll find the words to explain it all. She's a great poet. She'll be perfect in their Netflix documentary. Yasmin stumbles off the road laughing. The way she feels right now, a tiger could jump out of the jungle and she'd laugh in its fucking face.

The resort chills their mood. Downed trees lay where they fell. Waves break into the glass-walled infinity pool, now an aquarium where a small shark circles in the murky water. The seaside trattoria is flooded, a pack of dogs asleep in reception, silver and bronze villas looted and spraypainted, doors forced off their hinges, scrap wood from a gazebo trailing to the front gate.

Alex rolls back the gate. The sidewalk is full of people. They're all so clean, clothes and hair, nails and skin, all clean. Motorbikes and taxis idle at a red light. The fish market is busy this evening. A little girl chases pigeons by the fountain, her grandmother on a bench in the shade laughing. The man behind her in the day-glo vest is sweeping up leaves with a palm broom. Across the park, a food cart lady is selling styrofoam boxes of nasi goreng.

The smell makes Yasmin weep. Alex is distraught. They only have dollars. What if they can smell the food, but can't buy it? They wait anyway, and show their money to the woman. She shrugs and gives them two boxes, waving away their money. “Dollar too much,” she says.

Alex gestures at the resort. “What happened?”

She points with her chin at a For Sale sign on the gate. “Out of business,” she says, then points to the line of customers behind them. “My business good,” she gloats.

“When?” Yasmin asks. “How long has it been since the storm?”

The nasi goreng lady shrugs. “One month?” She yells to the grandmother on the bench, who yells back. “Maybe two weeks? Small storm, but the resort was broken. Broke.” She points uphill. “New beach, new hotel. Name Crystal Encounters. Stupid name, very beautiful. Tourist go there.”