Tommy Rock

We do our drugs as a team, bandmates, and Tommy Rock is our captain. He's sixty, with a face like a walnut and a liver that belongs in a medical museum, but he can still play the bass like he's trying to break the strings. We're in the basement of the Jade Palace, three levels down from the dining room where families are eating sweet-and-sour pork.

"The air's heavy," Tommy says. He's sitting on an amp, his bass on his knees, his hands shaking so hard he can barely hold his cigarette. "It's the grease. It gets in your lungs."

"It's not grease, Tommy," I say. I'm tuning my guitar. "It's the radon. The owner said there's a leak."

"I like the radon," he says. "It gives the bass more bottom."

He's lying, of course. He's just too cheap to buy a new amp, and his lungs are full of coal dust from his twenty years in the mines. He coughs, a sound like a shovel scraping concrete, then spits into a plastic cup.

"Let's do the one about the ocean," he says.

~

We play the same five clubs, a circuit of basement bars and bowling alleys in the suburbs of Pittsburgh. The pay is fifty bucks and all the draft beer we can drink, which is usually more than is good for us. We sleep in the van, three of us in the back with the drums, while Tommy sleeps in the front seat with his bass.

One night in Erie, the van breaks down. The alternator's shot, and we're twenty bucks short of a rebuild. Tommy goes into a pharmacy, his coat buttoned to his chin, his boots clacking on the linoleum. He's back in ten minutes with a bag of white pills and a bottle of gin.

"Chloroquine," he says, handing me a pill.

"I don't have malaria, Tommy."

"It's preventative," he says. "The lake's full of bugs."

We drink the gin and take the pills, and by midnight, the van is still dead but we don't care. We sit on the hood, watching the ice break on the lake, the black water churning under the moon like oil in a pan. Tommy plays his bass unplugged, his fingers moving over the neck with a dry, clicking sound that sounds like a beetle in a drawer.

"You think we'll make it to Canada?" he asks.

"Canada's closed, Tommy," I say. "They got a wall."

"They don't have a wall," he says. "They just have trees. We could swim it."

"It's thirty miles, Tommy."

"I was a champion swimmer in high school," he says. "Won the state meet in '74. They called me the Sturgeon."

He looked like a sturgeon: long, gray, with a snout that had seen too many fists. He takes another pill and washes it down with the gin, his eyes amber in the dashboard light.

~

The fire started in the engine on our way to Cleveland. We were ten miles out, the highway lined with dry sumac, when the hood went white with smoke. Tommy didn't stop. He kept his foot on the gas, his face set in a line of grim determination, until the engine died with a bang that shook the van's frame.

We rolled into the ditch, the weeds catching fire under the muffler.

"Get the gear," Tommy screamed.

We dragged the drums and amps into the field, the dry grass burning behind us, a red wall that rose thirty feet into the dark sky. The sumac along the road was crackling like small arms fire, the red berries bursting in the heat.

Tommy sat on his bass case, his hand over his eyes. "The van's gone," he said.

"Yeah," I said. "It's gone, Tommy."

"The bass is alright," he says. He pats the black vinyl. "The wood's dry. It'll have a better tone now."

We walked to the next exit, Tommy carrying his bass on his shoulder like a soldier with a rifle. The air was thick with smoke, and the soot fell on our faces like gray snow, but Tommy didn't cough. He walked with a steady, hydraulic stride, his boots clicking on the asphalt.

At the diner by the interstate, we sat in a booth and ordered coffee. The waitress was sixty, with hair the color of a wet nickel and a name tag that said Gloria. She looked at our black faces and our guitar cases.

"You boys in a band?" she asked.

"The Sturgeon and the Lampreys," Tommy said. "We're big in Canada."

She gave us three donuts on a paper plate. "My husband was in a band," she said. "Played the accordion. Died in '92."

Tommy took a donut, his hands shaking so hard he dropped it in his coffee. "A noble instrument," he said.

~

Tommy died in the spring, in a hospital in Cleveland. His liver just gave up, turned to sponge from the gin and the chloroquine. I visited him the day before he went. He had tubes in his nose and his skin was the color of a wet cardboard box, but he had his bass on the bed beside him.

"You still got the guitar?" he asked.

"Yeah, Tommy."

"Keep it in the case," he says. "The humidity's bad for the neck."

He closed his eyes, his breathing a dry rattle that sounded like the fan in our old van. "I can hear the lake," he said.

"It's just the air conditioner, Tommy."

"It's the lake," he insisted. "The water's cold. I can feel it on my gills. I was happy in the water. At least I made it back where I belong."